docs: Update plugins documentation (#6033)
nextflow-io/nextflow: docs/migrating-plugin-registry.md

:::{note}
The Nextflow plugin registry and Gradle plugin are currently available as a private beta. Plugin developers are encouraged to contact [info@nextflow.io](mailto:info@nextflow.io) for more information about accessing the registry.
:::

## Overview

### Nextflow plugin registry

The Nextflow plugin registry is a central repository for Nextflow plugins. It hosts an index of plugin metadata that supports plugin discovery, accessibility, and version tracking. Nextflow 25.04 and later can use the plugin registry as a drop-in replacement for the [legacy plugin index](https://github.com/nextflow-io/plugins) hosted on GitHub.

### Nextflow Gradle plugin

The [Nextflow Gradle plugin](https://github.com/nextflow-io/nextflow-plugin-gradle) simplifies the development of Nextflow plugins. It provides default configuration required for Nextflow integration, as well as custom Gradle tasks for building, testing, and publishing plugins.

> The Gradle plugin is versioned and published to the [Gradle Plugin Portal](https://plugins.gradle.org/), allowing developers to manage it like any other dependency. As the plugin ecosystem evolves, this Gradle plugin will enable easier maintenance and adoption of ongoing improvements to the Nextflow plugin framework.

Author: ```suggestion
The Gradle plugin is versioned and published to the [Gradle Plugin Portal](https://plugins.gradle.org/), allowing developers to manage it like any other dependency. As the plugin ecosystem evolves, the Gradle plugin will enable easier maintenance and adoption of ongoing improvements to the Nextflow plugin framework.
```

## Timeline

The [legacy plugin index](https://github.com/nextflow-io/plugins) will be deprecated in favor of the Nextflow plugin registry.

:::{note}
The following timeline is tentative and subject to modification.
:::

> ### Nextflow 25.04

Author: ```suggestion
<h3>Nextflow 25.04</h3>
```

The Nextflow plugin registry is available as a private beta. Nextflow 25.04 can use the Nextflow plugin registry as an opt-in feature. The Nextflow plugin registry will be automatically kept up-to-date with the [legacy plugin index](https://github.com/nextflow-io/plugins).

During this time, plugin developers are encouraged to experiment with the Gradle plugin and plugin registry.

> ### Nextflow 25.10

Author: ```suggestion
<h3>Nextflow 25.10</h3>
```

The Nextflow plugin registry will be generally available. Nextflow 25.10 will use the plugin registry by default. The legacy plugin index will be **closed to new pull requests**.

> Developers will be required to publish to the Nextflow plugin registry instead. To ensure continued support for older versions of Nextflow, the legacy plugin index will be automatically kept up-to-date with the Nextflow plugin registry.

Author: ```suggestion
Developers will be required to publish to the Nextflow plugin registry. To ensure continued support for older versions of Nextflow, the legacy plugin index will be automatically kept up-to-date with the Nextflow plugin registry.
```

> ### Nextflow 26.04

Author: ```suggestion
<h3>Nextflow 26.04</h3>
```

    - `DEPENDENCY`: (Optional) Your plugins dependency libraries—for example, `commons-io:commons-io:2.18.0`.
    - `PLUGIN_VERSION:` Your plugin version—for example, `0.5.0`.
    - `MINIMUM_NEXTFLOW_VERSION`: The minimum Nextflow version required to run your plugin—for example, `25.04.0`.
    - `PROVIDER`: Your name or organization—for example, `acme`.
    - `CLASS_NAME`: Your plugin class name—for example, `acme.plugin.MyPlugin`.
    - `EXTENSION_POINT`: Your extension point identifiers that the plugin will implement or expose—for example, `acme.plugin.MyFactory`.

5. Replace the contents of `Makefile` with the following:

    ```Makefile
    # Build the plugin
    assemble:
        ./gradlew assemble

    clean:
        rm -rf .nextflow*
        rm -rf work
        rm -rf build
        ./gradlew clean

    # Run plugin unit tests
    test:
        ./gradlew test

    # Install the plugin into local nextflow plugins dir
    install:
        ./gradlew install

    # Publish the plugin
    release:
        ./gradlew releasePlugin
    ```

6. Update `README.md` with information about the structure of your plugin.

7. In the plugin root directory, run `make assemble`.

> Alternatively, use the `nextflow plugin create` command to re-create your plugin with the plugin template, add your existing plugin code as needed. See {ref}`dev-plugins-template` for more information about the plugin template.

Author: ```suggestion
Alternatively, use the `nextflow plugin create` command to re-create your plugin with the plugin template and add your existing plugin code. See {ref}`dev-plugins-template` for more information about the plugin template.
```
